1. I NOW RELEASE being obsessed by my hostile feelings toward others.
2. I NOW RELEASE believing that sabotaging others will make things better for me.
3. I NOW RELEASE feeling jealous of others and their good fortune.
4. I NOW RELEASE my fear of failing and being humiliated.
5. I NOW RELEASE fearing that I am inadequate and will be rejected.
6. I NOW RELEASE feeling that I must conceal my mistakes and limitations.
7. I NOW RELEASE closing down my feelings in order to function.
8. I NOW RELEASE betraying my own integrity to get the admiration of others.
9. I NOW RELEASE attempting to misrepresent myself and my abilities.
10. I NOW RELEASE the grandiose expectations I have of myself.
11. I NOW RELEASE craving constant attention and affirmation.
12. I NOW RELEASE using arrogance to compensate for my own insecurity.
13. I NOW RELEASE desiring to impress others with my performance.
14. I NOW RELEASE concealing myself behind masks.
15. I NOW RELEASE comparing myself with others. 
16. I NOW RELEASE driving myself relentlessly  to be the best.
17. I NOW AFFIRM that I have value regardless of my achievements.
18. I NOW AFFIRM that I am centered and emotionally available.
19. I NOW AFFIRM that I am caring and have a good heart.
20. I NOW AFFIRM that I take in the love others give me.
21. I NOW AFFIRM that I am responsible to those who look up to me.
22. I NOW AFFIRM that I am happy to work for the good of others.
23. I NOW AFFIRM that I develop my true talents by accepting who I am.
24. I NOW AFFIRM that I delight in the accomplishments and successes of others.
25. I NOW AFFIRM that I can reveal my real self without being afraid.