1. I NOW RELEASE all feelings of rage and resentment toward others.
2. I NOW RELEASE all attempts to justify my aggressive feelings.
3. I NOW RELEASE all attachment to feeling victimized and abused.
4. I NOW RELEASE the fear that I am unwanted and unloved.
5. I NOW RELEASE all attempts to force others to love me.
6. I NOW RELEASE making others feel guilty for not responding sufficiently to my needs.
7. I NOW RELEASE abusing food and medications to make up for my loneliness.
8. I NOW RELEASE feeling that others owe me for the things I have chosen to do for them.
9. I NOW RELEASE believing that no one willingly takes care of me.
10. I NOW RELEASE expecting others to repay my help in the way I want.
11. I NOW RELEASE all physical ailments, aches, and complaints.
12. I NOW RELEASE calling attention to what I have done for others.
13. I NOW RELEASE feeling possessive of loved ones. 
14. I NOW RELEASE doing things for others to make myself needed.
15. I NOW RELEASE flattering others to make them feel good about me.
16. I NOW RELEASE not wanting to acknowledge my negative feelings.
17. I NOW AFFIRM that I own all of my feelings without fear.
18. I NOW AFFIRM that I am clear and conscious of my motives.
19. I NOW AFFIRM that I am lovable for who I am.
20. I NOW AFFIRM that my happiness does not depend on pleasing others.
21. I NOW AFFIRM that I can let go of loved ones. 
22. I NOW AFFIRM that I nurture my own growth and development.
23. I NOW AFFIRM that I love others without expecting anything in return.
24. I NOW AFFIRM the joy and warmth that fills my heart.
25. I NOW AFFIRM my gratitude for all that others have given me.