Transformations for PERSONALITY TYPE FIVE
1. I NOW RELEASE all fearfulness of the world around me.
2. I NOW RELEASE all feelings of powerlessness and hopelessness.
3. I NOW RELEASE my fear of being violated or overwhelmed by others.
4. I NOW RELEASE my dark and destructive fantasies. 
5. I NOW RELEASE isolating myself by rejecting others.
6. I NOW RELEASE believing that no one can be depended on.
7. I NOW RELEASE desiring to antagonize others and ruin their peace of mind.
8. I NOW RELEASE being cynical and contemptuous of the normalcy of others.
9. I NOW RELEASE fearing that others will exploit me.
10. I NOW RELEASE feeling that I am a misfit in life.
11. I NOW RELEASE being secretive and hiding from people.
12. I NOW RELEASE postponing my emotional needs.
13. I NOW RELEASE neglecting my physical health and appearance.
14. I NOW RELEASE the agitation and restlessness of my mind.
15. I NOW RELEASE feeling that I always need to know more before I do anything.
16. I NOW RELEASE avoiding my life by escaping into my mind.
17. I NOW AFFIRM that I am secure and grounded in the reality of my own life.
18. I NOW AFFIRM the strength and wonder of my body.
19. I NOW AFFIRM the value of my inventiveness and sense of humor.
20. I NOW AFFIRM that I accept uncertainty and ambiguity.
21. I NOW AFFIRM that my life and struggles are meaningful and rewarding.
22. I NOW AFFIRM that I have faith in the future and in human beings.
23. I NOW AFFIRM that I reach out to others confidently as an equal. 
24. I NOW AFFIRM that I find serenity in being compassionate toward others.
25. I NOW AFFIRM that I support others from the fullness of my heart.