1. I NOW RELEASE not taking an active interest in my own life.
2. I NOW RELEASE turning away from whatever is unpleasant or difficult.
3. I NOW RELEASE feeling that there is nothing I can do to improve my life.
4. I NOW RELEASE being numb and emotionally unavailable.
5. I NOW RELEASE refusing to see my own aggressions.
6. I NOW RELEASE ignoring problems until they become overwhelming.
7. I NOW RELEASE all dependency and fear of being on my own.
8. I NOW RELEASE all wishful thinking and giving up too soon.
9. I NOW RELEASE neglecting myself and my own legitimate needs.
10. I NOW RELEASE seeking quick, easy “solutions” to my problems.
11. I NOW RELEASE feeling threatened by significant changes in my life.
12. I NOW RELEASE losing myself in comforting habits and routines.
13. I NOW RELEASE feeling that most things are just too much trouble.
14. I NOW RELEASE all inattentiveness and forgetfulness.
15. I NOW RELEASE going along with others to keep the peace.
16. I NOW RELEASE living through others and not developing myself.
17. I NOW AFFIRM that I am confident, strong, and independent.
18. I NOW AFFIRM that I develop my mind and think things through.
19. I NOW AFFIRM  that I am awake and alert to the world around me.
20. I NOW AFFIRM that I am proud of myself and my abilities.
21. I NOW AFFIRM that I am steadfast and dependable in difficult times.
22. I NOW AFFIRM that I look deeply into myself without fear.
23. I NOW AFFIRM that I am excited about my future.
24. I NOW AFFIRM that I am a powerful, healing force in my world.
25. I NOW AFFIRM that I actively embrace all that life brings.