1. I NOW RELEASE holding myself and others to impossible standards.
2. I NOW RELEASE my fear of losing control and becoming irrational.
3. I NOW RELEASE my fear of being condemned for being wrong.
4. I NOW RELEASE refusing to see my own contradictions.
5. I NOW RELEASE rationalizing my own behavior. 
6. I NOW RELEASE obsessing about things I cannot change.
7. I NOW RELEASE all bitterness and disappointment with the world.
8. I NOW RELEASE feeling that other people’s beliefs and values threaten mine.
9. I NOW RELEASE believing that I am in a position to judge others.
10. I NOW RELEASE driving myself and others to be perfect.
11. I NOW RELEASE ignoring my own emotional and physical distress.
12. I NOW RELEASE feeling angry, impatient, and easily annoyed.
13. I NOW RELEASE fearing and disowning my body and my feelings.
14. I NOW RELEASE allowing my desire for order and efficiency to control my life.
15. I NOW RELEASE automatically focusing on what is wrong with things.
16. I NOW RELEASE feeling that it is up to me to fix everything.
17. I NOW AFFIRM that I can allow myself to relax and enjoy life.
18. I NOW AFFIRM that the best I can do is good enough.
19. I NOW AFFIRM that I am grateful that others have many things to teach me.
20. I NOW AFFIRM that I can make mistakes without condemning myself.
21. I NOW AFFIRM that my feelings are legitimate and that I have a right to feel them.
22. I NOW AFFIRM that I treat others with tenderness and respect.
23. I NOW AFFIRM that I am gentle and forgiving of myself.
24. I NOW AFFIRM that I am compassionate and forgiving of others.
25. I NOW AFFIRM that life is good and unfolding in miraculous ways.