1. I NOW RELEASE all anger, rage, and violence from my life.
2. I NOW RELEASE dehumanizing myself by violating others in any way. 
3. I NOW RELEASE being verbally or physically abusive.
4. I NOW RELEASE believing that taking vengeance will free me from my own pain. 
5. I NOW RELEASE hardening my heart against suffering.
6. I NOW RELEASE my fear of ever being vulnerable or weak.
7. I NOW RELEASE believing that I do not need others.
8. I NOW RELEASE believing that I must bully people to get my way.
9. I NOW RELEASE my fear that others will control me.
10. I NOW RELEASE feeling that I must only look after myself.
11. I NOW RELEASE my fear of losing to anyone.
12. I NOW RELEASE feeling that I must never be afraid.
13. I NOW RELEASE attempting to control everything in my life.
14. I NOW RELEASE allowing my pride and ego to ruin my health and relationships.
15. I NOW RELEASE thinking that anyone who does not agree with me is against me.
16. I NOW RELEASE being hard-boiled and denying  my need for affection.
17. I NOW AFFIRM that I believe in people and care about their welfare.
18. I NOW AFFIRM that I am big-hearted and let others share the glory.
19. I NOW AFFIRM that I am honorable and therefore worthy of respect.
20. I NOW AFFIRM that I am most fulfilled by championing others.
21. I NOW AFFIRM that I have tender feelings and good impulses.
22. I NOW AFFIRM that I can be gentle without being afraid.
23. I NOW AFFIRM that I master myself and my own passions.
24. I NOW AFFIRM that there is an authority greater than me.
25. I NOW AFFIRM that I love others and ask for their love in return.