1. I NOW RELEASE turning my anger and aggressions against myself.
2. I NOW RELEASE all self-hatred and self-contempt.
3. I NOW RELEASE all feelings of hopelessness and despair.
4. I NOW RELEASE all self-sabotaging thoughts and actions.
5. I NOW RELEASE feeling that I am inadequate and defective.
6. I NOW RELEASE the fear that I am unimportant and undesirable.
7. I NOW RELEASE feeling shameful and misunderstood by others.
8. I NOW RELEASE being distraught, fatigued, and inhibited.
9. I NOW RELEASE feeling that people always let me down.
10. I NOW RELEASE all unrealistic expectations of myself and others.
11. I NOW RELEASE all claims of needing to be treated differently.
12. I NOW RELEASE all self-indulgence in my emotions and behavior.
13. I NOW RELEASE all self-doubt and emotional vulnerability.
14. I NOW RELEASE wanting to protect myself by withdrawing from others.
15. I NOW RELEASE all wasteful fantasies and romantic longings.
16. I NOW RELEASE dwelling on the past to prolong my feelings.
17. I NOW AFFIRM that I am not defined by my feelings.
18. I NOW AFFIRM that only the feelings I act on express who I am.
19. I NOW AFFIRM that I open myself up to people and the world.
20. I NOW AFFIRM that I use all of my experiences to grow.
21. I NOW AFFIRM the goodness of my life, my friends, and myself.
22. I NOW AFFIRM that I love myself and treat myself gently.
23. I NOW AFFIRM that I am free of the damage of my past.
24. I NOW AFFIRM that I am transforming my life into something higher.
25. I NOW AFFIRM that I am bringing something good and beautiful into the world.