1. I NOW RELEASE my fear of being abandoned and alone.
2. I NOW RELEASE my self-defeating, self-punishing tendencies.
3. I NOW RELEASE all feelings of dread about the future.
4. I NOW RELEASE feeling persecuted, trapped, and desperate.
5. I NOW RELEASE overreacting and exaggerating my problems.
6. I NOW RELEASE taking out my fears and anxieties on others.
7. I NOW RELEASE being suspicious of others and thinking the worst of them.
8. I NOW RELEASE feeling inferior and incapable of functioning on my own.
9. I NOW RELEASE feeling cowardly and unsure of myself.
10. I NOW RELEASE acting “tough” to disguise my insecurities.
11. I NOW RELEASE my fear and dislike of those who are different from me.
12. I NOW RELEASE blaming others for my own problems and mistakes.
13. I NOW RELEASE being evasive and defensive with those who need me.
14. I NOW RELEASE my tendency to be negative and complaining.
15. I NOW RELEASE my fear of taking responsibility for my mistakes.
16. I NOW RELEASE looking to others to make me feel secure.
17. I NOW AFFIRM that I am independent  and capable.
18. I NOW AFFIRM that I can keep my own identity in groups and in relationships.
19. I NOW AFFIRM that I have faith in myself, my talents, and my future.
20. I NOW AFFIRM that I meet difficulties with calmness and confidence.
21. I NOW AFFIRM that I am secure and able to make the best of whatever comes my way.
22. I NOW AFFIRM the kinship I have with every human being.
23. I NOW AFFIRM that I am understanding and generous to all who need me.
24. I NOW AFFIRM that I act courageously in all circumstances.
25. I NOW AFFIRM that I find true authority within me.