---
tags:
  - edt
author: Susanne R. Cook-Greuter
book: "Nine Levels Of Increasing Embrace In Ego Development:\rA Full-Spectrum Theory Of Vertical Growth And Meaning Making"
---
# The Construct-aware and Ego-aware Stage
## The 5th person perspective and beyond

Time frame + Embrace : Beyond own lifetime; global historical perspective; multicultural awareness and appreciation of completely different ways of living and making sense of life.

Cognition : Complex interaction of nested systems; cross paradigmatic; understanding of evolutionary movement, unitary concepts are perceived but not yet fully embodied.

Preoccupation : Inner conflict around existential paradoxes, the habits of the mind and heart & intrinsic problems with language and meaning making in the dis cursive mode.

Positive expression : Accepting paradox and ambiguity, committed to serving self and others with humility in the face of our existential predicament as mortals needing maps and yearning to matter and make a difference.

Truth : In the personal, rational, symbol mediated realm of meaning making one is always separated from non duality, no matter what level of abstraction and of insight one gains. Truth via representational understanding is always partial, perspectival, geo and anthropocentric.

As a stage of differentiation, the 5th person perspective again questions everything that seemed to hold true and be certain up to this point. Indeed, an all-pervasive uncertainty is one of the characteristics of this stage. The suffering that can accompany this feeling of groundlessness is sometimes described as the dark night of the soul or in the existentialist French literature as “no way out.” This level, like others, becomes the home base for some individuals and its very fluidity and uncertainty can become a source of élan vital and relish. It is precisely in the tension between polar opposites that the most active engagement with life is experienced. Overall the first postautonomous stage reflects taking a further perspective on what went on before. Magicians are stepping back and observing meaning making from an even higher altitude and from a broader purview of what it is to be a human being than prior levels. This includes comparing and integrating multiple systems and paradigms. It also includes realizing our human need for map making and trying to organize experience and knowledge into ever more complex matrices and metatheories.
Evidence from the SCT indicates that for some adults the search for an integrated, enduring self-identity is superseded by a more immediate, fluid and process-oriented self-view. It seems that the systems view of reality can give way to a more flexible, continuously deconstructing, non-reified notion of self in a rare transformation beyond it. In his current interpretation of the fifth order of consciousness, Kegan (1994), for instance, describes adults at his interindividual or self-transforming order of consciousness as having such a process-oriented experience of the self. As soon as one becomes aware of one’s need to reify experience and tell a good self-story with a permanent self as its main actor, one deconstructs any such identification.

We have found it useful to distinguish between two forms of embodying this stage: 
a) The Construct-aware and b) the Ego-aware. Both are expressions of meaning making in the personal, rational and symbolically mediated realm of awareness. I originally named the 5th person perspective as the Construct-aware stage because becoming aware of the constructed nature of reality it is one of the most salient characteristics of this stage distinguishing it from prior stages. However, given new data and my observations of people over 30 years, I find that overall more people fit into the Ego-aware perspective than into the Construct-aware one. I thus now prefer to call the stage itself Ego-aware, and to distinguish more clearly between the two expressions. Some individuals seem to be more alert to the experience of living life in a fundamental quandary of questioning their own questioning and seeking while others focus more on the construction of meaning and the language conundrum. 

My theoretical hunch is that construct-awareness comes somewhat earlier on board in meaning making than ego awareness. A tenet of constructive developmental theory itself, namely that a certain level of cognition is necessary but not sufficient for stage development, seems to confirm this sequencing. In addition, if the hypothesis is valid that the ego is valiantly trying to create a coherent narrative about our existence and about the world, a last ditch attempt to create the most comprehensive maps possible would be one expression of this need at the Construct-aware level. On the one hand, it looks like becoming aware of the construction of meaning comes earlier than being aware of the ego’s fundamental needs and efforts at meaning creation. Personality differences as well as prior training may play a role in this distinction. Thus I have even wondered whether construct-awareness as a rational approach to meaning making can be skipped in favor of going straight for ego-awareness and towards ego-transcendence. Based on this more recent hypothesis, I first describe the Construct-aware form of this level. Additional studies may help to confirm or disconfirm the sequence.

a) the Construct-aware expression of this stage:
The Construct-aware stage represents folks who are aware that meaning is constructed, invented, generated rather than inherent in things, events and concepts. At the same time, Construct–aware
people try with great ingenuity and dedication to create super theories or multidimensional maps or tapestries of reality. They attempt to integrate whatever other theories they are aware of into an ever more complex and comprehensive theory of everything.31 Thus some Construct-aware individuals spend a lifetime creating such theories in order to provide the meta-perspectives or supermaps they feel are going to help themselves and others to better understand the complexity of human affairs. A chief indicator that we deal with such an endeavour is the extreme complexity of such theories.

Still others with the 5th person perspective begin to fathom the cognitive dimension of meaning making itself. They start to wonder about the meaningfulness of more and more complex thought structures and integrations such as can be imagined with a fifth or nth person perspective. Playing the complex numeric abstractions and formulas game is one way the ego can increase its sense of control and meaning. It also seems to please some individuals to demonstrate their capacity for mental gymnastics. Making the most of this talent and sharing it is a perfectly valuable contribution to the knowledge quest. But for those more interested in the quest for meaning, the simple question arises in the face of hypermentalism “so what?” How does ever more cognitive complexity serve our daily living and our understanding of the human condition? Some Construct-aware individuals therefore may also begin to realize the absurdity or automatic limits of human map making in the discursive, represen-tational domain.

Becoming conscious of the futility of describing reality by ever more complex maps and approximations can lead individuals to suffer greatly as they experience the limits, but have no way to transcend them with the same rational means that have brought them to grasping this state of affairs. An altogether different relationship to knowing is necessary, one people often glimpse during meditation or other altered state experiences.

b) The Ego-aware expression of the 5th person perspective
In contrast to the Construct-aware insights, Ego-aware individuals tend to be people who have become aware of the pattern of development that encompasses an ever broader realm of experience, action, feelings and thought. Above all they may viscerally get the absurdity of trying to understand reality with the mind and via representational means alone. The 5th person perspective enables them to analyze both their own becoming and the evolving theories about their own becoming as well as to begin to notice the fundamental need for orienting frameworks or stories that are at the heart of all human meaning making across the globe regardless of culture.

They realize that the “ego” has functioned both as a central processing unit for all incoming stimuli (ego as process) and as a central point of reference for self-identity formation (ego as representation) a distinction first introduced by Funk (1994). In light of the importance of this distinction, let me recapitulate the two distinct uses of the term “ego” in ego development. While the process of differentiation and integration is likely to continue all the way to a non-dual identity with the “ground of being,” EDT chronicles the nine transformations in self-identity that were deduced from analyzing sentence completions. In general, the self-identifications described by ego stages follow a pattern of increasing flexibility, choice and non-defensiveness as individuals mature.

Once human beings realize the fundamental function of the ego to create a sense of permanence and saliency, they may experience their full and inevitable ego-centricity. As long as one operates in the rational, language mediated realm, there is no escape from this insight. Having an ego which craves clear boundaries and significance and unceasingly tries to create them is now often felt as a constraint to further growth and understanding. When the ego becomes transparent to itself, it may well desire ego transcendence, but the very attachment to detachment creates the paradoxical situation of exacerbating the attachment. The more one tries to move beyond with greater effort, the more one gets stuck. Noticing and experiencing such existential dilemmas is common at this stage.

Unlike the more cognitively-oriented people with the 5th person perspective, Ego-aware individuals focus more on the ego’s clever and vigilant machinations at self-preservation by creating the illusion of a permanent self-identity. Final knowledge about the self or anything else is seen as illusive and unattainable through effort and reason because all conscious thought, all cognition is recognized as constructed and, therefore, split off from the underlying, cohesive, non-dual territory. Even such a concept as “ego” or “feelings” become now questionable. What is the ego other than a term we have created in order to explore and communicate a kind of experience in the West that is shared and utterly human. To what degree is this concept necessary and useful and in which way is it reifying experience to a degree that prevents us from fully being alive and open to experience without linguistic filters?

By turning further inward, Ego-aware persons start to see through their own attempts at meaning making. They become aware of the profound splits and paradoxes inherent in discursive thought. In many ways, they individually rediscover the Korzybski’s notion that “the map is not the territory.” Only this time, this realization is not just an interesting piece of received knowledge, it constitutes a vital and often temporarily painful aspect of consciousness.

Many find it fascinating to explore the linguistic process of naming aspects of reality by splitting experience into polar opposites as vividly portrayed in Genesis. The splitting is accompanied by automatic and socially supported value judgments about what is desirable and what is not.
In the last half century, constructive developmental theory has contributed much to refine this observation. What is considered to be desirable and what is not depends on the cultural context as well as on the level of consciousness. The interconnected nature of concepts only becomes obvious at the postconventional stages and then with increasing sharpness and clarity. Concepts makes sense only in conjunction with their surround and their polar opposite. Good and evil, life and death, beauty and ugliness are now recognized as two sides of the same coin. They mutually necessitate and define each other. While polarities as used in polarity dynamics can be understood as pairs of interdependent values at earlier levels, here, a deeper understanding of the discursive conceptualizations and abstractions is sinking in, namely how these are created in the first place. Moreover, some Ego-aware individuals can become aware how the constant and automatic judging habit of what is good and what is not creates much of the unhappiness and striving for betterment so prevalent in ordinary waking consciousness.

In general, Ego-aware individuals have a dynamic and multi-faceted understanding of human nature and the complexities of human interaction. They want to face their own profound need for theories and explanations. They hope to unearth the limits of the rational mind, and to unlearn their automatic, conditioned responses based on memory, acquired distinctions of what is good and bad through continuous, everyday cultural reinforcement. They are also aware of the habits of the heart, of our seeking for self-understanding and compassion for others.
Ego-aware individuals start to pay attention to their own emotional and rational processing patterns. To watch oneself trying to make sense is intriguing and absorbing and can become all-consuming. Living at the edge of meaning and meaninglessness can be exhilarating at times and frustrating at others. Whether individuals at this level focus more on the liberating aspects of their awareness or more on the disillusionment and sense of loss that come with this mindset probably depends on many factors: among them personality type, the company of understanding others, and general life circumstances. Ego-aware individuals begin to notice how fleeting and recursive thoughts and feelings can be. They may observe how these follow ingrained patterns of repetition that are not amenable to conscious effort at overcoming them. “Here my ego goes again despite knowing better” is the refrain often mentioned in Ego-aware sentence completions.

Needless to say, this new level of insight can be quite disconcerting and confusing. It’s like the bottom of the barrel has fallen out. Now there is truly no place to stand on. One must learn to live in the tension of the paradox that as a human being one must embrace one’s need for meaning while, simultaneously, understanding the futility of such an endeavour.
Ego-aware folks may come to feel that the automatic judgment habit that constitutes much of ordinary functioning as a major barrier to deeper self-acceptance and embrace of others. They observe the habits of mind such as the tendency to endlessly analyze and reflect in order to create ever more accurate theories of life and nature. All of these endeavors can now be understood as partial defenses against knowing the impermanence of the embodied self. Thus, at the Ego-aware stage not just cultural conditioning is seen through, but the predicament of living in language.
When people see through the filter of the symbolic construction and mapping of reality, their disposition towards the language habit can change profoundly. In general, Ego-aware individuals try to remain aware of the pseudo-reality created by words. They realize that the pursuit of objective self-identification and rational, objective explanations of the universe are futile--artifacts of our need to make permanent and substantive that which is in flux, immaterial, and impermanent. To reiterate a crucial point, the language habit works to support the ego’s supremacy whenever we make meaning through representations regardless of the specific tongue, power base, or cultural or personal context. At the same time, Ego-aware adults appreciate the vital function language plays in human affairs and growth.

As the process of self-awareness deepens and reasoning becomes further differentiated for individuals at the 5th person perspective, access to intuition, bodily states, feelings, dreams, archetypal and other transpersonal material increases. More than that, these sources of knowledge can become as important as rational deliberation for making sense of experience and for finding meaning in life. Indeed, the capacity to draw from and appreciate insights from non-rational sources of information increases throughout postconventional development.
Most importantly, the more regular practice of turning inward and observing one’s own mental processes also often leads to the spontaneous experience of a direct mode of being in which knower and known momentarily merge, and the personal self-sense disappears. These states are variously called peak moments, flow states, or bliss experiences. A. Maslow (1971) and M. Czikszentmihalyi (1990) give excellent profiles of the nature and consistently positive qualities of these states. I am not saying here that all contact with the numinous is blissful, only that flow states tend to be so, and thus,beckon the traveler to yearn for more such experiences. The process of dismantling the vestiges of the conditional self can also be harrowing as described in alternative states of consciousness entered through other means such as drugs or devoted meditation practices. Best known text in the West for that elucidates the confrontation with one’s demons is the Tibetan Book of the Dead.33 The conscious experience of non-ordinary states of consciousness in peak experiences -- where one loses track of self and time -- helps to put in perspective the self’s temptation for an exaggerated sense of power and agency and offers an alternative way of experiencing.

Ego-aware individuals report more often than people at earlier stages that they are watching or witnessing the parades of thoughts and feelings come and go without trying to direct them. Thus, they experience moments of freedom from the ego’s constant efforts at control and self-affirmation. Yet, at this stage, such experiences are short-lived. As soon as one evaluates and judges them, the magic is broken.
We are naturally reluctant to relinquish our familiar mode of functioning. We do not want to give up the illusion of our enduring separate identity, which we so laboriously learned to define, cultivate, and rely on for most of our conscious lives. Even if we understand that letting go of our attachment to the known will bring freedom from familiar kinds of suffering, attempts at doing so are ineffective and often lead to intractable paradoxes. The more one becomes attached to the idea of non-attachment, the more firmly one remains fettered. The more one is conscious and proud of one’s psychic powers and ego-transcending quest, the more clearly one’s ego is still enthroned. C. Trungpa (1987) in Cutting Through Spiritual Materialism has perhaps given the most cogent and concise analysis of how the ego can usurp transpersonal episodes for its own self-perpetuation and glorification.

It is a fact of life for persons at the 5th person perspective that there are few other people like them. They may fear that almost nobody understands them in their complexity and can sympathize with their experience. Fearing this, they wonder whether they are culpable of hubris, of feeling “better” than others. They also observe their own self-attachment and their need for a permanent self-identity by means of ever more comprehensive self-theories. On the other hand, they truly appreciate others’ need to make sense of their lives within their own means, values and mindsets. They therefore have a much deeper toleration for others’ solution to life without being blind to the possible shortcomings and limitations of such solutions. Sometimes Ego-aware folks express a sense of envy at the simplicity of earlier periods because their own world is experienced as so complex. However, given their ego maturity, most are capable of arriving at a dynamic and hopeful balance within these fundamental conflicts: They fulfill their perceived or chosen destiny independently and courageously in full realization of their basic despair and aloneness. When they cannot integrate this awareness, their depression is about man’s essential aloneness and inability to create lasting meaning through the rational enterprise.

Ego-aware individuals represent the first stage that looks at all experience fully in terms of ongoing fluctuations. In terms of theory, one builds edifices of knowledge and dismantles them as soon as they are erected. In terms of the heart, one may feel any emotion and then question its very validity and appropriateness as soon as it is felt or expressed. Ego-aware people are therefore even more sensitive than Autonomous persons regarding the well-being of others and capable of understanding them in compassionately in developmental as well as in psycho-dynamic terms.
When people with a postautonomous perspective choose to work in the public, they often rely on their fine-tuned interpersonal skills and insight into others’ complex and dynamic personalities. As leaders, they tend to build their own novel organizations or work alone doing what they perceive to be their best contribution to humanity. Some like to take on the roles of catalysts or transformers in organizations, but readily leave these when they feel their transformational work is done. They feel successful when they have made themselves dispensable, that is, if the organization itself has become transformative and self-organizing. In groups and organizations, they may notice archetypal and group process patterns that elude other observers. They may understand larger group forces and castings of individuals in the human drama, that the lead actors themselves are not aware of. As consultants and mentors, they can optimally adjust their engagement style to their clients’ personality and developmental needs: They can let them find their own way within their own means through empathetic listening, skillfully challenging set ideas, and helping them reframe their experience. They can support people in telling new self-stories, and gain courage to experiment with the boundaries of their current way of meaning making.
As therapists and coaches, they can listen to others’ listening and meaning making and be with them in an deeply empathic manner. They often offer transformational, non-distorted and creative feedback and practices to support their clients. They have access to their own earlier ways of meaning making in a much deeper and more effective way than people at the other postconventional stages. This allows them to freely tailor their interactions to the needs of those they interact with. Thus, Ego-aware individuals may have access to supporting Self-protective persons by dealing with them on their own level, unilaterally asserting their superiority and power.34 Unlike earlier levels, they are less concerned with success and rewards for their efforts. Sowing seeds that may take a long time to germinate if at all, is part of what one does because om can do no other.

As coaches and therapists, they do not presume that they can fully understand the experience of other people in their uniqueness while they feel an affinity with them on a human level. The 5th person frame of mind with its deep questioning of meaning making is open to not-knowing that no previous stage can fathom. It provides a constant level of awe and wonder about being a human being and the mystery of consciousness development. In light of this, a good indicator that someone is able to look at himself and others’ from this altitude is a profound humility about the limits of knowing.

Some Ego-aware individuals may, on the other hand, resent the very self-importance and sense of knowing exhibited by many Strategists with their air of certainty, subtle expression of self-satisfaction, and their burning desire to help others to self-actualize and become more integral and enlightened. They see the temptation to view oneself as the summit of human understanding and/or as a valid measure of what is possible and the desire for others to be different than they are as a basic shadow in change agents at earlier stages. In many ways, Blaire Pascal answered his question of “what is man?” in his essay Pensées (~1661) in a way that described the experience of the ego-aware person cogently. He said, and I paraphrase, “Man is nothing compared to infinity, and an infinity compared to nothingness.” While Strategists hang out on the infinity side of this equation and relish the sense of power and knowledge they have gained, Ego–aware individuals may sit in the tension of the two opposing perspectives, and vacillate between them. Some find most affirmation in knowing that so little of substance is knowable, and relish the mystery of being.
As highly differentiated individuals, some may be over-critical of themselves when they first become aware of their ego-attachment. With practice of experiencing one’s attachment to having an ego with ego needs and letting it go, Ego-aware individuals can become tolerant of themselves in their vacillating complexity. They generally use mature defenses (sublimation, non-hostile humor, bracketing out) as they become aware and insightful about their own foibles and defense styles. No longer do strong emotions need to be recast as positive aspects of the self. They can now be spontaneously expressed in their unmitigated form because the need to defend and look good has lifted. One is much more free to be who one is including revealing one’s emotions, vulnerabilities, and confusions. In the best scenario, this self-revealing openness can model to others that being vulnerable connects one to the very humanity of others. There is no pride in one’s actions, only the compassionate offering of the wounded healer.

To summarize, Postautonomous meaning seekers are capable of perceiving the structure of their own thinking and feeling habits, comparing them to that of others and discovering the fundamental limitations of all rational thought and the limits of language. Usually they come across as very bright, but often impatient with their own cleverness as they see it as just that. They are intrigued by the human need for meaning making and its ubiquitous expression across time and the known world. They understand for the first time the underlying process of how such meaning is constructed through the invention-construction of ever more complex theories. These are based on the segmentation and reification of the underlying flux of phenomena. Thus they are often preoccupied with the limits of discursive meaning making and with learning how to live with the existential paradox of being a mortal yearning for significance and immortality.

Conscious preoccupation: The limits of rational thought and language, and living in the tension of the consciously insolvable problem of existence and non-existence, life and death.

Counseling style: Ability to adjust style to clients: mentoring, letting others find their own way within their own means through empathetic listening, challenging ideas, helping them reframe their experience depending on where they are in their development.

Depression: Despair about man’s essential aloneness and inability to create lasting meaning through the rational enterprise.

Chief anxiety: Fearing that almost nobody understands them in their complexity and sympathizes with their experience, and that by fearing this, they are culpable of hubris. Concomitant with feeling not appreciated or understood can be a deep sense of loneliness.

Language clues: The language of Construct-aware people is often complex, vivid, authentic and playful. It is more direct, sometimes rawer than that of Autonomous persons’ because there is far less need to show one’s best side, to impress as at previous stages. Construct-aware people express a vast matrix of topics, concerns, questions, insights and commentary cleverly united into a complex sentence structure. Responses that have a stream-of-consciousness quality, or thought-in-progress mode belong here as do expressions of one’s attempt to let go of conscious structuring. Vivid expressions about the constructed nature of reality occur at this stage as well as fundamental questions about meaning making as a defense, concern with issues of definition, and epistemology.
